SGML-UG SIGhyper Document # 1991-1
Rev. 1991/04/01.  
Source: Charles F. Goldfarb, IBM Almaden Research Laboratory.  
Note: Dr. Goldfarb serves as Project Editor for ISO/IEC 10744: 
    "HyTime" Hypermedia Time-based Structuring Language.


		       Information About HyTime

The Hypermedia/Time-based Structuring Language (HyTime) is an
International Standard currently being balloted as a Committee Draft
(ISO/IEC CD 10744).  The ballot closes July 31.  A Draft International
Standard will then be published and balloted, with publication of the
approved standard expected next year.

The following material is excerpted from the standard.

			      DEFINITION

A standardized hyperdocument structuring language for representing
hypertext linking, time scheduling, and synchronization.  HyTime
provides basic identification and addressing mechanisms and is
independent of object data content notations, link types, processing
and presentation functions, and semantics.  Links can be established
to documents that conform to HyTime and to those that do not,
regardless of whether those documents can be modified.  The full
HyTime function supports "integrated open hypermedia" (IOH) -- the
"bibliographic model" of referencing that allows links to anything,
anywhere, at any time -- but systems need support only the subset that
is within their present capabilities.


                    SCOPE AND FIELD OF APPLICATION

                               1. Scope

This International Standard defines a model and language for the
representation of "hyperdocuments" that link and synchronize static
and time-based information contained in multiple conventional and
multimedia documents and information objects.  The language is known
as the "Hypermedia/Time-based Structuring Language", or "HyTime".

HyTime can represent time in both the abstract, or "musical" sense,
and in user-defined real-time units, and it provides for relating the
two so that all elements of time-dependent documents can be
synchronized.

NOTE -- This facility extends to multimedia information the ability to
distinguish between intrinsic information content and style
considerations that is a hallmark of contemporary document
representation methods.


The time model is extended to visual aspects of multimedia by treating
temporal and spatial measurement domains isomorphically, as systems
for measuring along different axes of a coordinate space.  Arbitrary
cross-references and access paths based on external interactions
("hypermedia links") are also supported.

The time representation contains sufficient information to derive the
durations of both control ("gestural") data (e.g., control information
for audio or video hardware) and visual data (e.g., a music score,
presentation storyboard, or television script).

The media formats and data notations of objects in a HyTime
hyperdocument can include formatted and unformatted documents, audio
and video segments, still images, and object-oriented graphics, among
others.  Users can specify the positions and extents of occurrences of
objects in space and time, using a variety of measurement units and
granularities.  Temporal requirements of applications ranging from
animation to project management can be supported by choosing
appropriate measurement granules.

NOTE -- This International Standard does not address the
representation audio or video content data, but simply defines the
means by which the start-time and duration of such data can be
synchronized with other of digitized information.  Nor does it specify
the layout process by which occurrences of unformatted documents and
other information objects can be made to fit the positions and extents
specified for them.


The documents comprising a HyTime hyperdocument can conform to any
architectures and be represented in any notation permitted by those
architectures.  Only the "hub document", which determines the
hyperdocument membership, must also conform to HyTime.

HyTime is designed for flexibility and extensibility.  Optional
subsets can be implemented, alone or in conjunction with user-defined
extensions.

The Hypermedia/Time-based Structuring Language is an SGML
application conforming to International Standard ISO 8879
--  Standard Generalized Markup Language.

The hyperdocument interchange format specified by this International
Standard is defined in Abstract Syntax Notation 1 (ISO 8824) and can
be encoded according to the basic encoding rules of ISO 8825 for
interchange using protocols conforming to the Open Systems
Interconnection (OSI) model.


                       2. Field of Application

The field of application of HyTime is "integrated open hypermedia"
(IOH), the "bibliographic model" of hyperlinking wherein an author
can, by a suitable reference, link to anything, anywhere, at any time.

Because of HyTime's modular design and flexible conformance rules,
implementations need support only those parts of that are within their
present capabilities.  User investment in hyperdocument preparation is
nevertheless encouraged because of the well-defined upward-compatible
path to a full hypermedia solution.

HyTime is intended for use as the infrastructure of
platform-independent information interchange for hypermedia and
synchronized and non-synchronized multimedia applications.
Application developers will use HyTime constructs to design their
information structures and objects, and the HyTime language to
represent them for interchange.

NOTE -- The HyTime language is not intended for encoding the internal
representation of information on which application programs act while
executing.

Applications can use HyTime to represent hyperdocuments containing
information that is at any stage in the rendition cycle, from
"revisable" to "optimized for interactive access".  An application can
also choose to convert a rendition of a HyTime hyperdocument into an
optimized form for transmission or interactive presentation.

NOTE -- Whether the HyTime representation of a hyperdocument can be
used in a local file system for direct access by programs will depend
on the type of information in the hyperdocument, the speed of the
platform, and the functions performed by the applications that access
the hyperdocument.



